David Shulman.
The first thing I said when he presented me with this copy is the library copy is well preserved.
It's got a hardcover or plastic.
Well, that was a hardcover edition.
This is a beautiful design.
It should be preserved.
What I'm going to do is give him a hardcover copy as well.
He promised to send me another copy.
I'll keep that as a reading copy.
Yeah, I'd love to read it.
Very impressive.
I've ordered some new hard covers.
The book is still in print in our cover, I'm pleased to see it, over four years.
And the other, it's not really a criticism, but I'm chauvinistic about it.
I don't think he did justice to the New York Public Library.
He didn't give me enough space to see the importance of the library rare book division.
And it's personnel.
They have accessible personnel compared to other libraries.
And I've been around the past years.
The present staff is superb.
Tops.
A1.
The collection is also A1.
That's the best.
It deserves more space and recognition and all that.
This book, of course, was about collectors.
But the only one you mentioned here was Bernie McTeague, whom we both knew very well.
I wrote about James Lennox in there, too.
What you did write about the past curators like Frank Mattson and others before him who were associated with the Red Book Division and the present staff.
Maybe we can redress that in the new book.
This new book is really more... I'm focusing more specifically on libraries.
This really wasn't about libraries per se.
This was about the impulse to collect and picking up on that thing.
But anyway...
Look, I did all the searches on you.
You've had quite a few articles on the New York Times.
You've had letters to the editor.
Oh, yeah.
You've been a Scrabble guy.
You've been a cryptologist.
A fascinating career in life.
How long have you known Mr. Schollinger?
I became the curator in 1992, so that immediately I met David, because he uses the division quite extensively.
And with the cryptography collection, he's been giving us money, actually, to process it.
So we've been dealing with that pretty regularly.
Preservation at most.
Preservation.
Very important.
So then in 94, when he became young, we moved his collections out of his apartment and his office.
We went through and selected material for the library.
He had a huge postcard collection that went to the U.S.
History, Local History and Genealogy Division, and collections of engraved images of Washington and Lincoln that went to the print room and children's literature.
tobacco ephemera, and all kinds of things that we collect.
The Arendt's tobacco collection.
I'm sorry, but he's pretty interesting.
He's a lifelong reader, but he's a reader in the rare book world, which really does elevate him a little bit, doesn't it, from the typical reader who might come in?
We have the same approach to the information.
It's everywhere.
And he starts with the most apparent
follows all the references and bibliographic citations and looks at every book that pertains to the subject.
I admire that.
That's the way I do work, so we've necessarily encountered each other over and over.
Because he's looking for, a lot of times, for the OED, the first appearance of the word.
So I've done the same thing here.
That's the real joy of this library.
You have a question, you can find a good answer.
because there's such a broad range of material.
So if you've got a manuscript letter or a booklet inscribed, you can find the papers, the letters, the diaries of the person who it was inscribed to, and maybe read about the day they received it.
I mean, that's amazing, all in one day, in one library.
You were quoted in the Times piece.
to the fact that he's the type of person that you're here to serve.
He's a reader, he's a writer, he's a researcher.
He's a collector.
He makes his contribution back to the library.
He's amazing.
And how long have you been coming here?
Since the days of depression in the 1930s.
Since jobs were scarce at that time, after I graduated from high school and college, I had a lot of spare time on my hands, and so I spent a lot of it in the library.
I just checked this every once in a while, it's fine.
And I found enough to keep me interested, and I stuck with it.
And then also, later on, I was fortunate to be able to get into the
journalism game, which was my ambition as a youngster, because I had a brother who was a copy boy and one of the metropolitan newspapers.
He inspired me.
And then I met some very important writers, starting with the World Telegram, where A.J.
Liebling was at that time one of the columnists or staff writers.
And he did a profile on me.
Really?
Yeah.
A.J.
Leibling.
Is that something we could get?
No doubt.
I'd love that.
I mean, I'd like to do more than just an interview.
Later on, he became staff writer for Talk of the Town for the New Yorker.
That would be great to get a Leibling piece.
Leibling, yeah, A.J.
Leibling.
Do you know generally when that might have been published?
Do you have a rough idea what year?
The profile was back in the 1930s.
And what was the paper again?
The New York World Telegram.
You don't think you'd have that here?
How would we find that?
Would we have to go to an index?
start with catnip.
It may have been converted to microphone already.
It may have replaced the hard copy with commercial film.
But it would be in some kind of an index, like the New York Times index.
No, there's no index to the world television.
Well, I don't want to make it too hard.
It's not too important.
It was a short piece, but it got me started because
I was able, after that, to get a position with the New York World Television as a feature writer for their Sunday magazine.
And how long were you waiting for them?
A very short time.
But while I was writing for it, I was lucky enough to meet Hayward Broom, the writer.
I know all these names.
Yeah.
He was a bear, a man, a husky man.
You would come in with a big stack of books, sit down at the typewriter and dash off his column.
To go back to Liebling, what was his interest in you?
Were you already this fanatical researcher?
At that time, I was an outstanding puzzle solver, a member of the National Puzzles League.
The National Puzzle League?
Yeah, of which I've been a member of for 50 years.
Can you mention college?
Where did you go to school?
City College.
Here in the city.
And what did you study?
General subjects.
Bachelor's degree?
For a Bachelor's degree, BA.
I just kept going in the evening session while I worked during the day.
And I kept going until they threw me out of City College because I had too many credits and I should have graduated a long time ago.
But I was taking advantage because it was free tuition at that time.
This is, again, still the 30s, right?
Yes.
So I accumulated 120 credits I needed for graduation.
I wound up with about 140 credits.
And they told me, oh, no, you can't make a career out of this.
But you loved the education again.
It was for the education and the wonderful teachers they had at that time.
Among the outstanding teachers was Professor Mario Pei, who was a great linguist.
He's famous.
Mario Pei.
Right, he's famous.
He authored many books on languages and linguistics.
Weasel Words is one of his books.
Didn't he write a book called Weasel Words?
Yes, yes, you know that.
You guys are going way back.
I'm going to go take off and write a few letters.
By coming back?
Yeah, give me a call if I don't, but by the time you're ready to go in.
Okay.
We will do a little biographical background here, and I think we have to go back in time.
Can I take a few pictures of him in here?
Sure.
Nobody will be upset.
How about a picture?
When we're done, maybe in here, with the stuff, I think, and in your place.
So I'll be back in a little while.
I'm going to go write a few letters.
You're going to talk about the war, and we've been here a few times.
She knows my story.
Our interview with Ricky Jay.
Remember that afternoon?
I didn't get lunch until 3 o'clock that day.
Ricky's in here.
Okay.
So tell me a little bit about, you said you were at City College, and you were working for the World Telegram.
What kind of stories were you writing?
I did a feature on puzzles, which appeared on the comic page of the Sunday magazine, the miscellaneous puzzles, you know.
And it was all right, but it didn't last too long because the New York Post was running puzzle contests, and I had an idea for a puzzle contest, and I went over to the New York Post.
to see if they'd be interested.
What started your fascination with puzzles?
Is this just something that you've always enjoyed?
Yes, as a youngster, I first got interested in puzzles when Houdini was editing a puzzle and magic section for the New York world.
And back in the 1920s.
So I got interested in that while I was in high school.
And solving the puzzles, I turned out to be very good at that.
This pretty much shaped your life to a great extent.
Actually, this shaped, to a great extent, shaped your life, this fascination for puzzles.
Yeah, well, intellectual fascination.
in lexicography and words and puzzles like charades, enigmas, riddles, acrostics, crossword puzzles.
Have you been pretty much able to solve most of the ones?
Yeah.
I was a completer, well I was known as a completer.
What does that mean?
International Puzzles League.
They published a magazine once a month, a monthly magazine, called The Enigma, which featured all kinds of puzzles.
And they had a solver's department where if you sent them the solutions, they give you the credit.
And if you solved everything, they called you a completer.
So...
For a couple of years, I solved everything in that magazine, and another magazine devoted to cryptograms from the American Cryptogram Association.
That was a bi-monthly magazine, and I solved everything at that time.
And what was your profession?
What did you do to make a living?
Well, as I said,
I approached the New York Post with an idea for a puzzle contest.
This is, again, still in the 30s, right?
Right.
Yep.
And... Paul Sarrison was in charge of their contest at that time.
and the head of his own group, Publishers Service, or other newspapers, with a contest for syndicators.
He told me that he liked my idea, but that he couldn't use it.
And he said, however, since you are a very creative person, I can use you on my staff.
That's great.
I said, fine.
He says, well, I told him I have other jobs.
He said, that's all right.
How much have you been making for the World Telegram?
I told him.
He said, I'll double that.
How much were you making?
Not much.
It was just a Sunday feature.
That's why I was looking for a full-time job.
Also, I was on the WPA project as a teacher of English to foreign-born people.
He asked me how much you're making on that.
And I told him, he said, I'll double that.
I want you to work for me exclusively.
Isn't that spectacular?
How do we spell this gentleman's name again?
Sarazen.
S-A-R-A-Z-N.
Paul Sarazen.
He was formerly a press agent for Sam Goldwyn in Hollywood.
And he's the one that hired you?
Yeah, he hired me, put me on the staff.
And all I had to do is create the same kind of puzzles that they had been using up to that time.
But he must have liked your flair.
He must have liked the intelligence, I guess.
Yeah, for being very intellectual and having a creative spirit.
Of course, I wasn't like in the newspaper, with newspapers.
You have different departments.
You have the business department, the editorial department, the circulation department, and the promotion department.
To increase circulation at that time, contests were very popular, especially games of skill.
So the sweepstakes was illegal then.
So the newspapers were able to really cash in on public interest.
So you did this for how many years for them, would you say?
What happened was that he undertook to do the first major contest nationwide with all grown cigarettes.
$100,000 first prize.
$100,000?
Wow.
At that time it was a lot of money.
That's a lot of money today.
And he had this stair set up.
to make up the puzzles to be solved by the public.
The people who buy packages of cigarettes and so on, and save the coupons, would be eligible for prize money.
And there were three people, including myself, who made up the puzzles for that contest.
Eiffel magazine came down, took out pictures, and so forth.
There's a lot of publicity to it, because it was the biggest contest up to that time.
Did they get any winners?
Somebody went out, I don't know.
Had winners.
But they had ties, and then they had to have a tiebreaker.
And the idea of a tiebreaker, that was part of my idea at that time.
So you came up with really tough buses?
Yeah, we had to make them very tough.
What does it take to make a good puzzle?
I mean, we always ask people what it takes to solve a puzzle.
It's mostly inspirational, like trying to make up a good poem.
You have to be sort of interested, motivated, and inspired.
Like Edgar Allan Poe was inspired when he wrote The Raven.
which he considered the greatest poem ever written, better than Shakespeare.
Which he did.
He takes vanity, too.
He does, doesn't he?
Yeah, he takes vanity.
Most writers have that.
They do, and I think I contested that.
They don't like to be criticized and stuff like that.
Well, you don't like being criticized, but you don't like people to say that your stuff isn't good, I guess.
I don't mind if you criticize it.
Well, I try to be constructive in my criticism.
There's one time I picked up a book by Kent Follett, bestseller.
Eye of the Needle, I guess.
Yeah.
His book was Rebecca.
It was about espionage during World War II, and it was involved
some secret writing messages and code and stuff like that.
And I wrote him a letter criticizing the method that he'd used for the secret writing.
Did he answer back?
Yes, he answered me.
I got an answer from his villa in France saying, I wish I had you at my side when I wrote the book.
Sure.
So then you did this for how many years, would you say, in the newspaper?
Well, the war came along.
I must have done it for about three or four years.
I got some department, but then I was dressed.
In the meantime, anticipating that field war
I took a special course offered by the Signal Corps, Cypress and Codes, cryptanalysis.
And was that a home course?
It was through the nail, yeah.
Cypress and analysis, that was it?
Cryptography.
And this was offered by the Signal Corps?
Offered by the Signal Corps.
That would be Fort Pearl Harbor.
for the outbreak of war, they were anticipating and trying to prepare, because up to that time they had very limited staff, such people who worked for the army or for military intelligence and so on.
So thanks to Mr. Friedman, William F. Friedman, the man who broke the Japanese code,
He wrote some textbooks.
You worked with him?
You met him?
Well, I knew him before the war because I admired his work.
And I went to Washington where I met him and his wife.
She worked for the Treasury Department, the Secret Service.
And he worked for the War Department in Washington.
He was a lieutenant colonel.
and he had done the same kind of work in World War I. So he had prepared these textbooks and a course in cryptography, and his department, they selected people that they thought would be interested in working in the Army if they were drafted.
serving in military intelligence.
And people, they consulted our organization, the American Cryptogram Association, and they tried to select those people who were very good salvers.
So I was right up there.
So you were recruited, actually?
Yeah.
I was invited to take the course.
They conducted a very careful background check through the FBI.
I can imagine.
or you could be accepted.
You're a New York native?
You're born in the city?
Yes, born here in New York City.
You grew up in Manhattan.
I know you live up in Brooklyn.
Yeah, I grew up in Manhattan and lived in the Bronx for a while and then lived in Brooklyn ever since.
So... What was your business or profession?
What did your dad, your father do?
Oh, he was a carpenter.
He had to work through the Depression years, but before he, you know, in the 1920s, he did very well as a carpenter, a contractor, worked on some big jobs, including the construction of the Roxy movie theater.
He took me there to the opening nights.
That's exciting.
In the 1920s.
Yeah.
But then came the stock market crash, and he, like everybody else, had difficulty finding work.
The reason I ask is just curious to see if you picked up any of these interests from your parents and so forth, your interests and puzzles.
None.
I was like self-taught, autodidactic.
Were there books in the family, in the household that you wrote with books?
No, I had to go to my local library.
I think I was a omnivorous reader.
I ran across books of interest to me, books on puzzles.
Sir, did you have an idea when you were a young man, I guess you wanted to view, I guess journalism?
Yeah, I wanted to get into journalism.
That's what you were pointing towards.
So tell me, let's jump ahead to the war years, because that's kind of fascinating too.
Why don't you tell me a little bit about what you did during the war?
After I was drafted, the Army at that time was hectic.
When the war broke out with Pearl Harbor and so on, they started drafting more and more people.
became, I don't know what words to use to characterize what the Army was doing.
They were assigning people here and assigned people there and very little logic behind the assignments and so on.
So when I was drafted at that time, I notified Mr. Friedman being drafted into the Army.
and the head of the Signal Corps, and I got a letter from General Maubourne, M-A-U-B-O-R-N-E, M-A-U-B-O-R-G-N-E, M-A-U-B-O-R-G-N-E.
Little rather, he stated that as soon as you are drafted and you get an army serial number, please notify the authority of Governor's Island, and we will then try to get you into the single court.
And that's what happened?
I notified the authority of Governor's Island.
Didn't hear anything from them.
In the meantime,
My boss, Paul Saracen, was reluctant to let me go, so he got me some deferments as a newspaper man.
Important to newspaper writing a function?
Yeah, very important.
I'm in charge of the contents.
The newspaper might suffer loss of circulation, whatever.
They lose their talent like mine.
But then after a while, the Army decided that there'd be no more departments.
Things were getting critical.
There were even more men.
They had to activate new divisions and so on and so forth.
It was not going so good, especially in North Africa.
So I went along with my boss.
I said, all right, stay on the job.
and tried to avoid being drafted.
So then when they started sending me letters from my local board asking me to report, I ignored those letters.
And then I had advice from a friend of mine who said, look, you're about 28 years old and the government's planning to give the firmness to people
28 years old at all.
I said, I held out, I didn't report, and the government then changed the rule on the aid limitation, and I'm exempt.
That could happen to you.
Sure, sure.
This is about 1942 or so, right?
Yeah, I was like on the borderline about 28 years old.
This is after Pearl Harbor.
After Pearl Harbor.
But then the government needed more and more people, so they didn't make any more changes, and I was stuck.
And finally, a friend of mine who was working at the induction center in Manhattan with the Army, it was a sergeant who was a personal friend who lived in my neighborhood, said, Dave, you better report.
The FBI has been notified they're going to get you.
Well, that'll get your attention, won't it?
Yeah.
So I went immediately to the induction center and reported, and they said, you have to stay here.
You're going to take your physical and all that and stay overnight and go directly to the camp where you are assigned.
You can't go home like everybody else and wind up your personal adventure because...
We can't trust you.
You missed so many invitations to report, to be drafted.
We're not trusting you.
But they grabbed you once you went in signal court.
They grabbed me.
They held me.
Then they sent me to Camp Upton.
Camp Upton?
Where is that?
That was in Long Island.
where then I was reassigned for basic training to the Air Force in Atlantic City.
Wonderful.
I said, I'll be in the Air Force.
You know, it sounded good to me.
Of course, a friend of mine, living in the same neighborhood, who got a letter from the Air Force to report, the same time I did, he reported immediately.
And he was put in the infantry.
And after two weeks basic training, he was sent to North Africa.
So what happened to General Morborn all this time?
No worries.
Nothing was heard from them.
And nothing from freedom.
But being out in the Air Force in basic training, I figured, oh, I'll ride it out, see what happens.
All of a sudden, there's a call for the Army Specialized Training Program.
people with skills and languages and engineering and so on, they would be sent to colleges, special training, and then back to the Army to serve as engineers, as linguists.
And I applied for Russian, because I had studied a little Russian on my own, and I thought maybe since we were allies now with Russia,
They might use translators, interpreters, and so on when we meet up with the Russians in the European theater.
Well, we just about finished with the nine months' training course in Russian, and at that time, all those who were studying Russian were sent back to New York City, to City College, from which I graduated.
So I was comfortable with that, too, because I could go home.
Sure.
I passed it.
After almost nine months, we were just about finished, because the Army decided to terminate it.
The program, the project?
Yeah, because Congress, some of the Congressmen in Congress had been getting letters from women saying, my son went to college, and why didn't he?
get into this program and go back to college with specialized training.
These boys are having it easy in college, while my son is in Guadalcanal in combat, and he's a college graduate of Yale, Harvard, whatever.
So they decided, Congressman, that we were having too soft to snap and all that.
At the same time,
They were scraping the bottom of the battle because they're getting ready for the invasion.
So where are we now?
So you're up to 1944 now?
Yeah, in the 1940s.
So when did you go into the Army?
In 42?
42.
So it's up to 44 now?
No, 43.
I went into 43, 44, and 45.
So I'm in the Army, and the Army decided, instead of sending us back to our original office,
sent me back to the Air Force, Atlantic City.
They put us all on troop trains and sent us all the way down to Mississippi for a whole new division that was being trained and activated and so on.
Be years later.
But you were in your 30s at this point, too, right?
I was around, yeah.
Because my father is your age, and he was drafted at the same time.
He was in his 30s, and they kept him.
The older guys, they waited until really getting to the end of the war before these fellas were ready to ship up.
So you were a little older than most of the other soldiers at this particular point, I think.
That's worth noting.
Isn't that true?
You were older than most of the guys who were going to combat duty.
So tell me a little bit about the work that you finally did.
I was in contact with youngsters who were 18 years who were drafted into the army.
I'll digress a little.
This is a really incredible story.
Hard to believe.
I'm just going to put this in my eye on it.
It's going fine.
Hard to believe.
Wow.
Terrific response.
That article in The Times.
Well, here I am.
You got it?
I'd say, here I am from that article, too.
Yeah.
Douglas Martin, you see, had written me up once before.
I'll get the story here.
Yeah.
He did two profiles on me.
Each time, tremendous calls, including radio shows and TV producers, even the producer, David Letterman, called me up and wanted to say,
put me on with David Letterman.
But he started asking questions, you know.
And I wasn't keen on the idea, so I just let it ride.
And I was glad that he turned me down.
Because some of my friends told me, you're a serious scholar, and you shouldn't be on a show with David Letterman, because he likes to make a baboon.
He does mock people.
Yes, and he might humiliate you.
But he'll make fun.
Yeah, he might make fun of you, and it's not at your level.
Well, I have a good sense of humor, and the producer at one point asked me, is there anything humorous or funny about
and that's economy and dictionary.
I said, yes, and I gave a couple examples.
But I didn't really want to appear on the show, and I was glad when he said, I'll let you know it's on an excuse.
I said, that's all right.
By the other hand, when I got a call from PBS, public broadcasting, it was Channel 13, a radio show with Mel Pate,
Now, he's a very serious interviewer.
He interviews books and writers and stuff like that.
And I said, yes, I'll appear on his show.
And I asked, how much would I be paying?
He said, no, we have other prominent people who have appeared on our show, and they never took any money.
I said, well, they can do it for nothing.
I can do it for nothing, too.
So I made a couple appearances.
He liked me and invited me back two or three more times.
And this is since this most recent article?
No, that was on a previous profile of Doug Martin.
So let's go back to World War II now.
It's a very long, long story, but I'll try to short it.
And there's sort of a digression, so we have to say at this point, after I finish with the war, I'll say, do you know French?
I'm French.
I know Mouton.
It's a very popular... Which translates...
We shall return to our sheep.
That way, if you're a shepherd and you digress, and you lose track of your sheep, your flock, whatever subject, you will promise to return.
Is that one word there?
Revenor?
Revenor.
It's a very kind of saying.
I like it.
all the books on the location.
I might even make a chapter title out of it.
Yeah.
A lot of writers like to use that expression when they find their digression, getting off the beaten path, getting a little bit out of focus.
So anyway, this is about the Army.
I went through all kinds of experiences and escapades.
They put me on a troop train after I was trained to be a Russian interpreter.
I wound up in the infantry down in Mississippi.
Immediately, I applied for a transfer to the Signal Corps, and they transferred me to an anti-tank company.
Jeez.
Once again, I applied for a transfer, and they transferred me to combat engineers, all in the same camp, same division.
And the officers tried to tell me that out of this division, we cannot transfer anybody.
We have to be full strength when we go overseas.
We can't spare any men.
So when I was a combat engineer, I asked one of the officers at headquarters to approve my request for a transfer.
He said, look, I was a lawyer.
before I went to the Army, and I can't get a transfer.
I said to him, oh, then, boy, you've got to lose.
You know I'll be turned down, so you're careful.
Sign it.
So he signed it.
And he said, oh, you're from Brooklyn.
He said, I'll give you some advice, because I also came from Brooklyn.
If you get called in by the colonel, I'm going to recommend that to the colonel that he called you in and went with you on your request for a transfer.
We get called in by the colon, smile, and answer very frankly, whatever it is, whatever questions he'll ask you.
I said, okay, fine.
A couple of weeks later, I got a request from headquarters down in Mississippi, combat engineer in that division.
The colonel wanted to see you.
Go in there.
He says, at ease.
He says, I'm at ease.
He says, soldier, if I decide to transfer you and assign you to combat, would you be willing to go into combat?
I said, yes, sir, but I think.
Fair to last.
Yeah.
I was in the Vietnam War myself, but I went through similar issues.
We have a rapport.
I was in public relations, public affairs, and I kept waiting to hear from people in Washington who wanted me.
You know, all about the red tape and the routine.
That's why I'm laughing.
There are a few things like the boats that don't change.
The military doesn't change.
The boats are in mind.
So I said, however, I think the Army would be making a great mistake in my case to put me in combat because I could save many, many lives with it.
training and background I have as a person with a college degree and also trained in cypress and code, the importance of breaking the enemy code can save many, many lives.
True.
I mean, that's totally true.
Yes.
In fact, that was expressed in some of the books on the history of cryptography and espionage and so on.
To be able to capture the enemy plans
especially if they were in code or secret writing, they would crack those codes, as Friedman did with the Japanese code, the Enigma, I mean, the magic cipher machine.
I have a book on that at home, The Enigma.
So what did you, so they... He said, it's like putting a round peg in a square hole.
He said, I like that.
I like that reply.
I'll tell you what I'm going to do for you.
I'm going to approve your transport.
Really?
I'm going to send it up to headquarters.
This was Mississippi.
Trade on the headquarters in Tennessee.
It will be up to them.
They're on a higher level.
All I can do is push it, but I can't promise you that they'll approve it, but I'm giving you my approval.
That's what he did.
About a month later, an order comes in in Washington, D.C.
in order for me to report to the military police in Washington, D.C.
for further instruction as classified.
I can't say anymore.
I am to take the next train and appear immediately to Washington, D.C., down in Mississippi, and report to the military police for further instruction.
My sergeant's brought out an order, called me out to the drill field, and he said,
Yes, there'll be someone holding.
Worries that he could command, and you're faster.
You're going to the Pentagon.
The commanding officer came in, and he likewise was mad.
I got the transmitter, and he thought I would never get a transmitter.
That's why he signed his approval when I gave him the blanks.
He says, you cannot leave unless you turn in all your equipment.
Let's see your rifle.
It's really giving you a hard time.
Yeah.
Right.
He was going to prevent me from leaving.
So out of spite, is this what this is all about?
The spite?
Is he being spiteful?
Well, you know, you were in the Army.
There was a lot of prejudice and hatred and so on, envy and jealousy.
Jealousy?
I had one sergeant in New York Air Force when I was in basic training, and one day he comes over to me and he says, you wise guys from Brooklyn, we'll show you.
He was from Ohio, a hillbilly from Ohio, big husky guy, and kept my mouth shut because I knew
He had the power to court-martial me, because they even took some fellow who refused to get his hair cut short, and gave him six months in the guardhouse for refusing to obey an order.
Right?
Let's return to our sheep.
Okay.
So finally, I got that transfer.
I got into the Singapore.
I went through the Mill, Curry and Chosen's training.
in a classified camp down in Virginia, and then I was assigned to Alaska to work on Japanese codes.
We had a radio company in Alaska on the Aleutian Islands.
They were intercepting Japanese radio messages, but they were in code.
They were passed on to us.
by the radio operators.
We edited the work and passed it on by teletype down to Washington, D.C.
When the war was over, we were sent to California for reassignment.
I immediately went home because we were given furloughs and were supposed to come back.
Instead of coming back to the camp in California,
I wrote a letter to a commanding officer saying that it would be cheaper for the government to give me my discharge to save the fare from my return to the camp.
I didn't have enough points that there hadn't been a comeback.
All these guys were coming back from the Pacific, from Alaska, from Japan and Okinawa.
So, commanding officer,
Much to my surprise, Wilton, he said, sure, go ahead.
Report to Fort Dix and pick up your discharge.
Great.
Anything really exciting that you worked on during the war?
Did you break any codes?
I broke a Japanese classification code.
And how did that come about?
How did you do that?
We were handling these messages, and the Japanese had a system whereby they could indicate on each message, each telegram that they sent out, a radio message, the nature of the message, like top secret, secret, confidential, and so on.
And there was a system to that request.
You couldn't read what type of message it was because that was in code, a separate code from the message itself.
And since down in Washington, D.C., they had already broken that code.
They knew what was what.
They would send the information to us as to the nature of the code.
It changed each month.
So I worked on it.
and found out what the system was.
Then the next time, Washington had to send us a changeover for the following month before they could send it to us.
I instructed my outfit to send it to them.
To Washington?
To Washington.
What we knew to be the correct classification of the messages.
We got a commendation for that, my outfit, at the end of the war.
They gave us a special certificate of honor throughout our field and the work we did.
So what's the trick of breaking a boat?
What's the trick to it?
No trick, it's mostly hard work.
Are you looking for patterns?
Yeah, you look for patterns, frequencies, and there's a corroborative help when they capture
an enemy, a spy and so on.
But in the case of the military intelligence, they made every effort to capture like a sunken submarine and recover the code books on the enemy.
They kept that secret.
If an enemy ship or submarine went down,
They always had instructions to destroy the code books immediately.
Sometimes they didn't do that.
Sometimes they didn't have time to do that or evacuate immediately to save their lives, you know.
But the Army and Navy, they knew where the ship went down and they sent down deep-sea divers to try to recover the code books.
And they did?
In some cases they did.
So you get out of the... I'm interested now, I'd like to jump ahead to the collections that you put together, those various... Yeah, it was just a time that I was interested in ciphers and codes and so on.
I made every effort to collect any book or article that appeared on the subject, no matter what language.
And it's been in the Depression days,
it was easy to be a collector but books are very cheap at that time while I was collecting books I was supposed to let the dealers know that's what I'm looking for but some dealers were a little bit ignorant they said what?
photography?
I said no cryptography and they said no we don't have any
And they probably did.
And I point to a book over there, a pile of miscellaneous books.
Yeah, I spot a book immediately.
The American Black Chamber, I believe.
You've got that?
And where was this, down in Fourth Avenue?
Did you read it?
Yeah.
I went to all the bookstores periodically, along book row, and checked whatever it was, what they had and so on.
Because I had plenty of time on my hands.
And then later on, when I was working for a puzzle practice, I also had plenty of money.
There we are.
What David is doing right now is he's requesting some items from rare books.
These are items that he's already presented to the library.
Yeah, he gave the library his collection of cryptography, and wonderfully enough, he also gave us his bibliography.
That includes his library.
Yeah.
We'd like to see my bibliography.
So now it's called a bibliography.
So we have access to it, even though it isn't completely processed, which is the perfect way to get a collection.
So often people give us material and they don't have a list.
So we've got to, you know...
We did make a list, too, of the other material you gave us in 1994, so I have an inventory of that as well.
Can you give me a rough sense of the numbers of what he's given you?
Well, in this collection of the cryptography, about a thousand books.
I think there are about a thousand books in that collection, wouldn't you say?
Yeah.
And then with the multiple small collections, the children's literature, sort of like the boys' stories, group of things.
Miniature books.
Miniature books, dime novels.
We didn't count the postcards, but I think there were about 1,700 item numbers in that.
We didn't count the postcard.
That was about 10,000 cards, wouldn't you say?
Yeah, so you collect everything.
20,000 cars.
So you're kind of a magpie, aren't you?
You collect everything.
No, there was a method in my mind.
Yeah, there's a theme to it, and it's something that's really hard for people to do when they're making collections because they don't have the patience or the time that David put into it.
Yeah, you have to understand if I'm about collecting.
There are collectors, and then again there are collectors.
There are collectors on one plateau, collectors on another plateau.
I consider for one plateau collectors with deep pockets who can buy anything like J.P.
Morgan.
On another plateau, collectors who really appreciate what they're collecting and read what they're collecting.
They're bibliophiles.
We give them a more academic
and respectful names.
I look at the subtitle of my book, you see, Bibliophiles, Bibliophiles.
That's it, that's right.
Bibliomaniacs.
The maniacs are those who want to have everything, have no sense of discrimination.
They accumulate.
Yeah, they accumulate.
And the result is I've run into many collections.
People want to sell me things and so on.
And as we come down, take a look at my collection, I'm ready to retire.
I want to get rid of all this.
Collection.
I take a look and see.
Romance novels, paperbacks, trash of all kinds and so on, you know, not worth saving.
They didn't understand.
These people were like maybe laborers who suddenly became wealthy, had money to spend, and then some of them were buying books for investments.
And you can't really invest on books unless you know and understand
The value of books themselves, the interest of the value, I understand that.
It's better to collect the Shakespeare first folio than to collect that forever amber by so-and-so.
Well, not only that, but the method of, you know, the patience, the time, the opportunity, making it possible.
I mean, David didn't collect everything out of one bookstore with one bookseller as a guy.
went everywhere.
He bought things at Swan for very little money.
Every week I went through there all the time.
He knew what he wanted and he waited and he saw it.
You said there's a method.
In your view, what's the method?
And then Dale will give David a chance.
I think his theory, or my theory of it, is that he had an idea.
He found an outstanding example of one thing.
The idea being what?
To collect, for instance, the Jacquard printing.
He collected
portraits of people and drawings that were printed with a jacquard loom?
How do we spell that?
Jacquard.
J-A-C-Q-U-A-R-D.
Okay.
So he had one piece, and then he had several pieces, and then he has a whole collection, including a portrait of Jacquard.
Yeah.
And he has a story about the portrait of Jacquard that he saw hanging, was it in City Hall?
The City Hall.
Somewhere back around 1910,
He spent about $10,000 to acquire this portrait of jacquard woven fabric on a jacquard loom.
I don't know if you're familiar with the jacquard process of weaving.
He invented certain... So how did you get interested in a jacquard loom?
He spent $10,000 on this portrait, and they got down City Hall down in the basement, and they don't know anything about its background.
I did research on it.
And it was only by chance that I found out that the famous mathematician, Babbage... Oh, he's famous.
Yes.
He was the first one to invent a calculating machine.
I've just been looking him up.
Yes.
In a diary, he wrote about a trip he made to the southern part of France where Jacquard had a factory and they were weaving...
all kinds of patterns and silk and other fabrics and so on for commercial and artistic distribution.
And as souvenirs, they had a portrait of Jackhart that they would give away to prominent visitors like Fadich.
And he acquired that portrait, and that's how I know it came about.
It was never offered for sale, and it was just reserved for the visitors in Jackhart.
So for our use, of course, then we can present a whole variety of examples of Jacquard crack.
And this is not the kind of thing that you would normally collect on your own, is it?
No.
You have to understand what you're collecting and the rarity.
And his understanding of what it is that he's buying and why.
So, for instance, the children's, the literature, the boys' books,
Children's literature is the strength of the New York Public Library.
And he picked up this one area of books that were printed for boys, boys' stories, boys' books.
It's kind of a... I think it's an extension of the dime novel.
Is it a pulp kind of a thing?
Or is it actually hardcover books?
It's hardcover books.
Hardcover books?
Hardcover books.
And it's stories about, well, famous Americans, Teddy Roosevelt and the Rough Riders, and also about different...
careers, you know, firemen, policemen, thematic stories, newspaper men, and then it's also stories about boys.
You know, and maybe you can give me a comment on this, what's really quite remarkable, and I didn't see it in the New York Times piece, but I think, and it should be stated, not only are you getting the collection, but you're getting it, you're also getting him.
I mean, most collections come afterwards, as part of a will or whatever he saw fit to turn this material over to
at a time when he can help you out with it, tell you what it is.
And we did struggle with that, didn't we?
He can be a resource, he can be as important a resource in the collection as any item in it.
Yeah, that's what I meant when I said that he also writes about his collections and publishes, and that gets the word out there with his bibliographies and the descriptions, and the descriptions of his collecting and his collections, and it helps us because people then know what we have, and he helps us with the research.
Absolutely.
He writes about the dime novels,
We have a large collection, by the way.
You said you were... I mentioned to you about that.
You saw my article.
I did, yes.
Where do you get published mostly?
American Speech.
It's a scholarly publication, quarterly, now being published by the University of Alabama.
H.L.
Mencken helped to found it.
devoted to the study of the American English language.
And you've also had articles in Brooklyn Bridge, which is a regional... No, not in Brooklyn Bridge.
Not yet.
And then Biblio.
They were interested, but they didn't do anything yet.
Biblio?
Biblio, yes.
A special article on the Cypher Collection.
I had the title
I've got all the magazines.
Best kept secret, the New York Times, catalog and everything.
Right.
But we have your bibliography.
Okay.
So I'm going to go get these books.
All right.
And when we go in, you guys are going to be real quiet, right?
Because there's a lot of people in there.
It's a busy afternoon.
We'll go out again before I do a discussion with you.
But I want to take a few pictures of you here.
Yes.
This is a beautiful space.
The light is perfect in here.
A little dark in there.
You know it's dark in there.
We don't want it too dark.
Oh, yeah.
My picture of the Times came out too dark.
Oh, I didn't think so.
I thought it was great.
In fact, I've told people they ought to order that from the Times, so that's probably the pictures.
They're going to send me one of the pictures.
He took about 50 pictures.
He's the dean of the photographers.
Jack Manning.
Jack Manning, yes.
No, I've already checked it out.
He's got an ordinary little camera with him and some Rosser film.
You know, there's one other thing that you may be interested in.
When Mr. Shulman and I talked initially about the collection, he told me what happened.
We had contacted Sotheby's.
You contacted Sotheby's, didn't you, at one point?
Yes, for the second copy of Trithemius.
But remember when you contacted, you said you contacted him about your collections as a whole?